Well, it's good afternoon.
NOTE CONF
Your reps have asked me to make an announcement.
I imagine that you.
NOTE CONF
Well, I don't know.
You should be the people who the announcement is directed
NOTE CONF
to, but I just thought you don't need it anyway.
Apparently some of you are having difficulty finding places to
NOTE CONF
work when you're stuck hanging around here between activities, and
the reps asked me to point out that this building
NOTE CONF
is the most crowded building.
There are many other buildings on this campus, and GMB
NOTE CONF
apparently has screens showing you where working areas are, and
the upper floors of GMB are often relatively empty.
NOTE CONF
GMB is a very interesting place.
I spent 20 years there and there are still bits
NOTE CONF
of it that I haven't been to, so you can
go and work in there and find all the little
NOTE CONF
corners that nobody else will ever find.
Just make sure you take a ball of string to
NOTE CONF
get out again.
Are there any questions from yesterday?
NOTE CONF
There was a lot of concept and notation yesterday.
You're all gone through it.
NOTE CONF
Or shall I just continue straight on assuming everything is
fine?
NOTE CONF
Now what if we'll just go straight on?
So let me remind you what we did yesterday.
NOTE CONF
We introduced a slightly weird notion of non-deterministic automaton, which
we can basically think of as an automaton, where we're
NOTE CONF
exploring lots of possibilities simultaneously, and all we require is
that one of them works.
NOTE CONF
One of them turns up with the good answer.
And I told you, the reason we would do doing
NOTE CONF
that is because they're easier to work with in practice.
But I haven't yet given you a convincing explanation of
NOTE CONF
why we want to work with them in practice.
So that's where I'm hoping to get to today.
NOTE CONF
But before we do that, I'm going to introduce yet
another refinement, yet another extension.
NOTE CONF
It's another slightly unnatural thing, but also very useful for
reasons that will become obvious.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to define something called an epsilon NFA.
By now you should all have learnt your Greek alphabet,
NOTE CONF
so you should know epsilon.
And this is a notion of automaton which has a
NOTE CONF
special symbol, epsilon, which is not part of the input
alphabet, but we can write epsilon transitions.
NOTE CONF
So I can write an epsilon transition between two states.
And what does that mean?
NOTE CONF
Well, it means that the machine can, just of its
own accord, decide to move between these two states without
NOTE CONF
actually reading any input.
Now, I just said decide.
NOTE CONF
Of course it doesn't decide anything.
This is just non-deterministic.
NOTE CONF
So at any point in the execution of the machine,
you have the possibility of moving along an epsilon arrow
NOTE CONF
or staying where you are.
And as with the previous explanation yesterday, all possibilities are
NOTE CONF
explored.
So.
NOTE CONF
If I draw this machine and it reads an A.
There are a couple of things that might happen.
NOTE CONF
It might read an A and end up here or
before reading the A might run.
NOTE CONF
It might just go to this state and then read
the A and end up there.
NOTE CONF
So remember, things are good if any of the possibility
ends up in a good state.
NOTE CONF
So that particular epsilon automaton accepts the single input a
why do we do this?
NOTE CONF
It's a technical tool.
It makes life much easier to build machines that recognise
NOTE CONF
the concatenation of two strings, or that recognise the repetition
of strings, and that is something we do a lot
NOTE CONF
in practice.
So I will show you this fairly shortly.
NOTE CONF
Have I made it more difficult?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Not really.
Everything we've done so far goes through.
NOTE CONF
If you just pay a little bit of attention to
the details.
NOTE CONF
Um, goes through a very dangerous mathematical phrase.
Mathematicians will say, oh, yes.
NOTE CONF
I make the slight adjustment to the definition.
Everything goes through.
NOTE CONF
Um, what they mean is somebody, hopefully them, has done
the work of checking that everything still works.
NOTE CONF
In particular, the subset construction that we did yesterday where
we built a deterministic machine by taking the states of
NOTE CONF
the deterministic machine to be the sets of states of
the nondeterministic machine still works.
NOTE CONF
So we haven't really added any power.
We just added a gimmick that is useful in practice.
NOTE CONF
And we can still determine I's an automaton and we
still recognise regular languages.
NOTE CONF
So what do I mean by everything goes through?
Well, we can still build a product of two automata.
NOTE CONF
There's a little bit of work to be done with
the epsilon transition.
NOTE CONF
You can find the details in the book.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So product works just like Dfas.
And whether you have epsilons or not is just a
NOTE CONF
small detail.
What was the other thing that we did with the
NOTE CONF
deterministic automata?
We said it was easy to complement them.
NOTE CONF
We can recognise the strings that are not in a
language.
NOTE CONF
This is the big thing that we have lost by
adding nondeterminism.
NOTE CONF
So why have we lost it?
Yesterday I asked you could we have decided made any
NOTE CONF
different choice than saying we accept if any one ends
up in a good state?
NOTE CONF
One of the alternatives was any was all ones end
up in a good state.
NOTE CONF
That's obviously not the same thing.
Why can't we complement a nondeterministic automaton?
NOTE CONF
Well, exactly.
Because we say that an NFA accepts if any of
NOTE CONF
the executions is good.
So if we complemented it, we can't just flip the
NOTE CONF
accepting states, because we would also need to say, look,
all the executions end up in the new accepting states.
NOTE CONF
That is the old bad states.
And that's not how non-deterministic automata work, because they require
NOTE CONF
any execution to succeed.
Um, what this says is not exists is the same
NOTE CONF
as for all, which by now you all should know.
So we can't make an easy, obvious compliment construction on
NOTE CONF
a non-deterministic automaton.
How could we build an automaton that recognises the complement
NOTE CONF
of a nondeterministic automata.
Automatons.
NOTE CONF
Language.
Anybody?
NOTE CONF
Well, what can we do?
We know we can convert it to a DFA, right?
NOTE CONF
Yesterday we did a conversion to a DFA.
Um, and we know that we can write the complement
NOTE CONF
of a DFA.
So in the worst case, if we can't think of
NOTE CONF
anything clever to do, we can always turn the NFA
into a DFA, do the complement from last week, and
NOTE CONF
then we have the result.
So the problem with that is that when you do
NOTE CONF
the determination process that we did yesterday.
You're dealing with sets of states, so the size of
NOTE CONF
the automaton typically blows up exponentially.
And generally speaking, we like to think of negation as
NOTE CONF
a nice, simple operation.
We don't expect it to lead to an exponential blow
NOTE CONF
up.
However, it's a fact of life.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's a fact of mathematics that when you introduce
this kind of non-deterministic idea, then complementation gets complicated.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
Because Nondeterminism says there exists a path that works.
NOTE CONF
And so if we negate it, we have to say
for all paths that work, and then we have to
NOTE CONF
look at all of them.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So questions about that.
And you might wonder how often do we actually want
NOTE CONF
to do complementation in practice, not all that often, but
occasionally it's useful.
NOTE CONF
But usually when we want to do complement, we want
to complement something very small.
NOTE CONF
We want to say things like, um, I want to
see a word that does not begin with a.
NOTE CONF
And that's an easy thing to complement.
What else can we do with Nsfas?
NOTE CONF
Well, we can build the sum we saw how to
build the sum.
NOTE CONF
We just put them side by side and take the
union of the states.
NOTE CONF
So we did that yesterday.
We don't need to do anything fancy.
NOTE CONF
We don't need to build a product.
We just take the two amata two automata, draw them
NOTE CONF
on the same piece of paper and say the union
works.
NOTE CONF
Um, lots of notations.
Some people write that the thing that the epsilon automata
NOTE CONF
have brought us is that we can build things that
recognise the concatenation of two languages.
NOTE CONF
And what do I mean by the concatenation of two
languages?
NOTE CONF
If L is one language and L is another, then
the concatenation is simply things that have a string in
NOTE CONF
the first language, followed by a string in the second
language.
NOTE CONF
And that's something that we use a great deal in
the applications of this stuff.
NOTE CONF
Because if you're recognising Haskell syntax or any other language,
then you are doing a lot of saying a sentence
NOTE CONF
is a noun phrase followed by a verb phrase, and
a noun phrase is a determiner followed by some adjectives,
NOTE CONF
followed by a noun or whatever.
Or the equivalent in programming languages.
NOTE CONF
So concatenation is the one the single most used operation
when we're actually doing language processing.
NOTE CONF
So it would be nice if it were very easy
to do it.
NOTE CONF
You should take a little time to think how you
do it deterministically.
NOTE CONF
It's not hard, but it's just needs a little bit
of attention to the way you plug the two machines
NOTE CONF
together.
When we go non-deterministic, then it's not quite so obvious
NOTE CONF
how to do it.
If you think about a non-deterministic automaton and how to
NOTE CONF
plug it together.
Then you will find that the details get a bit
NOTE CONF
fiddly.
But if we have these epsilon transitions, we can make
NOTE CONF
it very, very straightforward.
So there's a formal definition.
NOTE CONF
So here I've got my two epsilon non-deterministic finite automata.
And they have different sets of states.
NOTE CONF
So I stick the states together.
The transitions are the unions the final states.
NOTE CONF
Well what are the final states.
And then I add some extra transitions.
NOTE CONF
So these are the transitions in one.
These are the transitions in the other.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm adding more transitions.
These are all epsilons I'll give you a picture in
NOTE CONF
a moment because the picture is much clearer.
And the epsilons are just joining the accepting states of
NOTE CONF
automaton one to the initial states of automaton two.
That should make sense, because what is.
NOTE CONF
If you want to see strings in this language, followed
by strings in this language, you run the string on
NOTE CONF
automaton one.
It accepts.
NOTE CONF
Then you start this.
The rest of the string on automaton two.
NOTE CONF
If that accepts, you've got a concatenation of the two
strings.
NOTE CONF
But when things are non-deterministic, it sounds a little bit
more complicated, because what if you end up in the
NOTE CONF
wrong kind of state?
So let me put this in words.
NOTE CONF
Put the two machines side by side.
For example this one and this one.
NOTE CONF
So what does this one do?
This reads.
NOTE CONF
This accepts strings that begin with two A's or begin
with two B's.
NOTE CONF
And this one is the one that accepts a string
that ends with a b.
NOTE CONF
So hopefully if we stick these two machines together, we
want to get something that accepts strings that start with
NOTE CONF
two A's or two B's, and that afterwards end with
an A and a B.
NOTE CONF
To do that, I want to join the accepting states
to the initial states.
NOTE CONF
But I want to avoid confusing matters by making this
state accepting.
NOTE CONF
So you might think, can't I just glue these two
states together into one?
NOTE CONF
But then I will get confused about what's accepting and
what's not.
NOTE CONF
So what I can do is to just draw some
arrows from the good states here into the initial state
NOTE CONF
here.
So in this one, which doesn't have any epsilons to
NOTE CONF
start with.
It could have, but it doesn't at the moment.
NOTE CONF
I read my string.
And in the States where I have successfully read a
NOTE CONF
string from the first one, I can jump to the
start of the second one and start looking for string
NOTE CONF
for the rest of the string, ending with AB.
And that's nice and easy.
NOTE CONF
So the notation is a bit fiddly, but the picture
is easy.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, as I said, go away and think about what
NOTE CONF
you would do if you didn't have epsilon transitions.
How would you glue these together and make sure that
NOTE CONF
it worked precisely?
And the thing that really gets much easier is something
NOTE CONF
that we also want to do a lot, which is
to recognise lots of copies of a string.
NOTE CONF
So a typical piece of discourse or piece of text
has many copies of whatever your thing is.
NOTE CONF
Lots of sentences.
Programming language is a lot of repetitions of the same
NOTE CONF
construct.
So if you remember a little while back, I introduced
NOTE CONF
the star notation.
Star is arbitrary repetition of something.
NOTE CONF
That's something that we want to recognise a lot.
So here's the machine that recognises A, B or BA.
NOTE CONF
Here's the machine that recognises strings that are made up
of sequences of a, b.
NOTE CONF
So you can you see a ba a b a
a any number of repetitions of either of these two
NOTE CONF
things.
And this is quite neat because I haven't had to
NOTE CONF
do anything except jump from the final states to the
initial state.
NOTE CONF
And again, you can go away and try to do
this with deterministic automata or non-deterministic or better non-deterministic automata
NOTE CONF
without epsilons.
And you'll find it's hard at work.
NOTE CONF
Of course it's not impossible.
It's just Fiddler to write down correctly.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So that's a couple of several things I've introduced complement
NOTE CONF
product some concatenation and looping.
So I should pause and say do you want me
NOTE CONF
to say more about any of these?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Say that the section of the empty set.
Why is that.
NOTE CONF
So if for some I say what?
Oh, here.
NOTE CONF
Um, that's just a technical detail.
I'm saying that these are two distinct automata.
NOTE CONF
If that weren't true, then I would be talking about
two automata that have a state in common.
NOTE CONF
So it's purely a notational fiddle.
Mathematical precision.
NOTE CONF
We never think about taking two automata that happened share
a state, because that's what we're building.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if you're if you're a mathematician, then you
might write it differently.
NOTE CONF
You could write disjoint union or something.
So I could write.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I could write disjoint union there if you're happier.
In fact maybe I should, but I'm never sure whether
NOTE CONF
everybody actually knows what I mean.
If I write down the disjoint union sign.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any other questions about the sum.
NOTE CONF
Or the concatenation.
So that's I think intuitively very easy to do.
NOTE CONF
Can't get much easier than just sticking the final states
to the accepting states and looping is even easier.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Do we write down automata in practice when we actually
NOTE CONF
want to recognise languages?
No, of course we don't.
NOTE CONF
So how do we actually write down regular languages when
we are writing something to parse a program?
NOTE CONF
So if you're trying to recognise a piece of Haskell,
what do you do when you write the program that
NOTE CONF
analyses a sequence of characters and says, This is Haskell?
Well, actually it gets quite complicated.
NOTE CONF
And if you will do courses on this in third
year compiling techniques, um, a bit of advanced warning.
NOTE CONF
Compiling techniques has always been one of the hardest courses
for most people.
NOTE CONF
I hated it, but I had to do it because
there's lots of technical stuff and it all looks like
NOTE CONF
this, but harder.
Um, what you want to do is to be able
NOTE CONF
to write a nice, simple textual notation that describes the
language you're trying to recognise and have some tool, some
NOTE CONF
program, do the work of turning it into automata and
running them for you.
NOTE CONF
So this is where we introduce something that is actually
useful in practice.
NOTE CONF
So I use these every day pretty much.
Is that true?
NOTE CONF
Well, almost every day.
There are things that we call regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is a dispute about what the right abbreviation
for regular expression is.
NOTE CONF
Some people will say regex, which has the advantage of
being a pronounceable English word.
NOTE CONF
Some people will say regexp, which has the disadvantage of
not being a proper English word.
NOTE CONF
And what they are is a simple, simple programming language
with a very simple textual programming language.
NOTE CONF
And I think I asked you last week whether you'd
seen them and a few people have.
NOTE CONF
I suggested that you go out and find about using
them because they will make your life much easier, particularly
NOTE CONF
when you're writing programs and you want to change something.
So you've all used find and replace in your word
NOTE CONF
processor or your text editor, right?
I mean, I imagine everybody has used find and replace.
NOTE CONF
Um, find and replace can be very simple minded.
So it might just say I want to replace every
NOTE CONF
occurrence of the word foo by the word bar.
But when you have regular expressions and a powerful editor,
NOTE CONF
then you can do much more complicated things and replace
lots of words at once with a constant part and
NOTE CONF
a varying part by saying something like.
Oh, I shouldn't wife over there because it's not visible
NOTE CONF
online.
Um, don't mean that.
NOTE CONF
Actually, I didn't mean to do that.
Forget that.
NOTE CONF
So this is a simple thing.
Suppose for some reason known best myself.
NOTE CONF
Have the audio gone or not?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Suppose for some reason known best myself, I've all named
all my variables starting foo, and my boss comes along
NOTE CONF
and says that's not the standard.
This project names all variables starting bar.
NOTE CONF
What do I do?
Well, I don't want to go through doing a search
NOTE CONF
and replace on every variable.
But what I can do is say look for every
NOTE CONF
word that has the form foo followed by some letters
and replace it by.
NOTE CONF
That should now be one.
And replace it by bar, followed by the sequence that
NOTE CONF
I found.
So that's the kind of thing that one does in
NOTE CONF
editors.
A lot.
NOTE CONF
And I'll explain a little bit about the syntax of
these things.
NOTE CONF
Um, of course, sometimes it's easier just to do the
thing by hand anyway, but it's generally more fun to
NOTE CONF
try to work out how to do it with a
regular expression search.
NOTE CONF
Um, now, this is supposed to be partly a theory
course, and it's an unfortunate fact that there's a traditional
NOTE CONF
way of teaching regular expressions in theory courses using one
notation.
NOTE CONF
And that notation is not the notation that everybody uses
in actual practice in programming languages and editors and everything
NOTE CONF
else.
So I thought I might as well just use the
NOTE CONF
programming language editor notation, because that's what you're going to
use whenever you actually use a regular expression.
NOTE CONF
So be aware that if you go and look at
books, you will find an alternative notation.
NOTE CONF
What's the main difference?
When we're doing theory, people tend to write union, whereas
NOTE CONF
in programming languages people tend to write a vertical bar
symbol for all.
NOTE CONF
Um, and in programming languages, we have lots of stuff
that makes it shorter and easier to write things.
NOTE CONF
Have you heard the phrase syntactic sugar before?
Nope.
NOTE CONF
One or a few people.
So syntactic sugar is useful.
NOTE CONF
What does it mean?
So it's sweet because it makes everything sweeter and easier
NOTE CONF
to do.
And it's also unnecessary like sugar.
NOTE CONF
So syntactic sugar is bits of syntax that make things
shorter and easier to write, but which you don't, strictly
NOTE CONF
speaking, need.
And most programming languages have quite a lot.
NOTE CONF
So when you study programming languages that more or less
any level, you will find out that you don't need
NOTE CONF
for loops, you don't need for loops, because you can
always turn a for loop into a while loop and
NOTE CONF
vice versa.
So why do we have for loops and while loops?
NOTE CONF
It's because it's easier sometimes to think about while and
easier to think about for and languages who are designed
NOTE CONF
for.
People with extreme laziness have more sugar.
NOTE CONF
So I mentioned my favourite programming language, Perl.
It's notable for many things, and it has vast amounts
NOTE CONF
of syntactic sugar and lots of slightly different constructs which
can confuse you.
NOTE CONF
Um, so here's the programming language definition of what a
regular expression is.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to define it in a vaguely mathematical way.
So I'm saying I've got an alphabet.
NOTE CONF
This is the input alphabet of your automata.
And I'm going to define the class of regular expressions
NOTE CONF
in a mathematical way, which is basically the same as
defining them in Haskell by a big recursion.
NOTE CONF
And each time I define a new type of regular
expression, I will define the language accepted by them.
NOTE CONF
So my base case is.
If a is one of my input symbols, then a
NOTE CONF
by itself is a regular expression.
And what's the language?
NOTE CONF
It accepts a okay.
Epsilon is a regular expression.
NOTE CONF
It's a very special regular expression.
It accepts the empty string.
NOTE CONF
No input at all.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the language it accepts is only the empty string.
Then I'm going to define ways of sticking to regular
NOTE CONF
expressions together.
And this does exactly what you expect it to do.
NOTE CONF
If I've got two regular expressions, r and s and
I write r s, then what I expect to happen
NOTE CONF
is that it's the strings that have something in R
followed by something in S, it's the concatenation.
NOTE CONF
So if r and s or regex is, then r
s is a regex and the language it accepts is
NOTE CONF
the concatenation of the two languages as defined earlier.
Remember, this means exactly anything that is a string in
NOTE CONF
L of are followed by a string in L of
S.
NOTE CONF
If I've got two regular expressions, then I can form
the sum or the union.
NOTE CONF
So this is exactly the same as the automaton.
Some construction.
NOTE CONF
As I said, most all programming languages I can think
of right now, although there must be exceptions, right?
NOTE CONF
A vertical bar for the all symbol.
And the way you remember that is that it's just
NOTE CONF
like the logical or so we're saying.
We're looking for a string that is recognised either by
NOTE CONF
R or by S.
Um, finally there's the star.
NOTE CONF
So this is the cleaning star that I introduced and
this is the looping operator.
NOTE CONF
What do I mean by that?
I mean it recognises any string that is any number
NOTE CONF
of repetitions including zero of a string recognised by R.
So strings in the language of are repeated any number
NOTE CONF
of times, different string each time, of course.
And the zero repetition means that the star operator always
NOTE CONF
includes the empty string, because the zero repetition is just
the empty string.
NOTE CONF
Um.
That's the kind of formal definition, but it's.
NOTE CONF
Relatively obvious.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's really just notational definition relating it to automaton.
Any questions about the notation.
NOTE CONF
A couple of examples.
So the language from a couple of slides ago where
NOTE CONF
I was looking for strings that were a sequence of
a, B or BA.
NOTE CONF
So that was the automaton where I had a b
ba.
NOTE CONF
And then I looked back in regular expression terms.
That's just this thing either a, B or bei or
NOTE CONF
ba and I looped them.
So the star operator is essentially looping.
NOTE CONF
This is the one that demonstrated the concatenation of two
languages as well as some looping.
NOTE CONF
So this is the one where strings have to start
with either A or B.
NOTE CONF
After that, they can do anything as long as they
end with a b.
NOTE CONF
And this kind of expression is about the level of
complexity that you will typically be working in practice.
NOTE CONF
This one is extremely hard to work out, so I
have to admit that I did not work this out
NOTE CONF
by myself.
I tried for a while and then I gave up
NOTE CONF
and googled it.
Um, it is possible to.
NOTE CONF
We know that we can write down a deterministic finite
automaton for the language with an even number of zeros.
NOTE CONF
We did that early last week, and therefore there must
be a regular expression describing it, but it turns out
NOTE CONF
not to be at all simple.
So you might like to go away and think about
NOTE CONF
Why it is that this regular expression is so much
more complicated than the very simple DFA that we were
NOTE CONF
able to write last week.
And to think about that, go and look at the
NOTE CONF
DFA and then think about trying to turn it into
a regular expression, just by using your native wit and
NOTE CONF
following your nose and seeing where you end up.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So this is not the kind of thing that you
typically write down in a programming language.
NOTE CONF
If you need, if when you're writing a parser, you
actually need to look at strings with an even number
NOTE CONF
of zeros in it.
You'll probably have a separate function to count it, because
NOTE CONF
that's less work than actually writing this regular expression.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So regular regular expressions are syntax.
What can they do?
NOTE CONF
Well, regular expressions are constructed by reference to automata.
So the constructions I gave you for regular expressions were
NOTE CONF
concatenation.
Some.
NOTE CONF
Looping.
Was that it?
NOTE CONF
That was it.
So these are the same operations that we had for
NOTE CONF
non-deterministic finite automata.
And therefore it's completely straightforward to take a regular expression
NOTE CONF
and draw its automaton as long as you're drawing a
non-deterministic automaton.
NOTE CONF
And I claim that it's so easy that it wasn't
even worth my while spelling it out in detail because
NOTE CONF
you just match plus to, plus sorry bar to plus
concatenation to concatenation, and star to loop.
NOTE CONF
If you really need to see it spelt out in
detail, then the details are in the book because the
NOTE CONF
book has all the details.
What does that let us conclude?
NOTE CONF
Well, we know now that if we have a regular
expression, it's language, the language that is recognised by the
NOTE CONF
regular expression.
Is the language recognised by a nondeterministic finite automaton.
NOTE CONF
And that means it's a regular language.
So it's also the language recognised by a deterministic automaton.
NOTE CONF
So if we wanted we could determine size it and
blah blah blah.
NOTE CONF
So everything is the same regular expressions dfas nfus.
They all recognise the same classes of language, which is
NOTE CONF
a reason why the regular languages are a very nice
class, a nice and simple class.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you can think about one thing you might
want to think about.
NOTE CONF
This is just a little exercise to do afterwards.
Take this regular expression a b.
NOTE CONF
So view this as a regular expression and apply the
constructions to it and see what you come up with.
NOTE CONF
And then just write down the automaton that you would
naturally write and think about why they're different.
NOTE CONF
Um, actually, I'm going to do it for you, so
I'm going to hastily skip over it and let you
NOTE CONF
think about it.
Don't look at the slide.
NOTE CONF
Um, it shouldn't be surprising to you that this was
a two way thing.
NOTE CONF
So a regular expression describes a language that is regular.
If I take any regular language, I can build a
NOTE CONF
regular expression to describe it.
You might think that this should be easy as well.
NOTE CONF
Unfortunately, it isn't easy.
It requires work, and there are two ways to do
NOTE CONF
it.
The book describes, first of all, the way that I
NOTE CONF
think is harder to understand.
Therefore, I'm going to give you the other way because
NOTE CONF
I think it's much easier to understand, and it's also
easier to do in practice.
NOTE CONF
So the way in the book basically proceeds by solving
equations in regular expressions, which is another level of conceptual
NOTE CONF
burden that I don't think we need.
Whereas there is a way where you can do it
NOTE CONF
just by mashing things together until you get the answer.
So my problem is, given an automaton, how do I
NOTE CONF
compute the regular expression that accepts exactly the same language?
And essentially the idea is to introduce a more complicated
NOTE CONF
notion of transition and start smashing states together and instead
writing more complicated transition labels.
NOTE CONF
So the fundamental example of doing this.
Here's an automaton that accepts a b.
NOTE CONF
So this is the one I would naturally write down
to represent a b.
NOTE CONF
And I want to turn this into a regular expression.
Well I look at this state.
NOTE CONF
I observe that I could just delete it and say
that I can write an arrow that is labelled by
NOTE CONF
a b, because if I see a B, I have
to go through this state.
NOTE CONF
So I might just as well say there's a single
arrow which reads A and B it in sequence all
NOTE CONF
at once.
Where does life get complicated?
NOTE CONF
Well, life gets a little bit complicated if there are
loops, but not very hard.
NOTE CONF
So self loops are often tricky.
We've written this construction often this is strings that start
NOTE CONF
with an A and end with a B with anything
in between.
NOTE CONF
Well, self loops turn out to be very easy to
describe because they just look like this.
NOTE CONF
I look at the symbols on this arrow that's A
and B, and then I say I can just do
NOTE CONF
those any number of times.
Um, so far so good.
NOTE CONF
Notice that I've used several constructions.
So I've used concatenation to concatenate.
NOTE CONF
And I've used or here to combine a multiple transitions.
Remember this is really a shortcut for two arrows one
NOTE CONF
labelled A and one labelled B.
And I've combined them together with or.
NOTE CONF
And then I've used the looping construct because this is
a loop that I can go around any number of
NOTE CONF
times, including none at all.
Um, but it's maybe a bit harder to see.
NOTE CONF
What do we do if there are loops here in
the initial state?
NOTE CONF
What do we do if they were loops in the
final state?
NOTE CONF
Um, that's a slightly harder problem to deal with.
If you try to do the obvious thing, you'll find
NOTE CONF
it doesn't work.
So what we do is use epsilon transitions.
NOTE CONF
Here's an automaton which has some initial states and some
final states.
NOTE CONF
It would be easier if there were just one initial
state, which there is, and just one final state which
NOTE CONF
there isn't.
With Epsilon, we can take any automaton and make a
NOTE CONF
special initial state that is distinct from the original automaton,
and a special final state that is distinct from the
NOTE CONF
original automaton, so that we only have one beginning and
one end to worry about.
NOTE CONF
So all I'm doing here is saying I'm adding a
new dummy state, which then leads to the original real
NOTE CONF
initial state, and I'm adding a new dummy final state,
which all the original final states lead to.
NOTE CONF
Once you've done this, then these things can be concatenated
very straightforwardly just by gluing together this state with that
NOTE CONF
state.
So now we repeat.
NOTE CONF
So in this one I would start by I would
remove that state and replace it by an ab arrow.
NOTE CONF
I would remove that state and replace it by a
bar arrow.
NOTE CONF
Then I would union these two transitions to get a
BA or a B and so on.
NOTE CONF
It's straightforward and it's easy to program and it's quite
we don't ask you to program it I don't think,
NOTE CONF
but it's quite a good exercise.
What we end up with when we do this is
NOTE CONF
one arrow from the dummy initial to the dummy end
with an enormous regular expression on it, which is the
NOTE CONF
one we want, which describes all the strings accepted.
So that procedure, I think, is quite easy to understand
NOTE CONF
and do.
And that means that we have proved that the regular
NOTE CONF
expressions describe exactly the regular language.
Every regular language has a regular expression, and every regular
NOTE CONF
expression describes a regular language.
Um, as I said, the book describes the other technique,
NOTE CONF
which is the one that I was taught when I
did this kind, of course, as a student.
NOTE CONF
Um, it might be easier to program, but I found
it much harder to understand intuitively.
NOTE CONF
Do go away.
Have a look at it.
NOTE CONF
You might think differently from me.
And as I say, if you're feeling relatively strong, you
NOTE CONF
have enough coffee inside.
You try doing this technique on the even odds and
NOTE CONF
even one machine, and see whether you end up with
that regular expression or not.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's quite a lot of new notation.
Again, this has been a very heavy week for notation,
NOTE CONF
which maybe not the ideal way to end the core
content of a course, but hey, we have to teach
NOTE CONF
it.
Any questions on this stuff.
NOTE CONF
We do, of course, have next week for you to
ask questions if you need it.
NOTE CONF
Um, I want to finish off this topic by saying
a little bit about a little bit more about regular
NOTE CONF
expressions in real life.
I said they had syntactic sugar.
NOTE CONF
I haven't introduced much syntactic sugar.
So for your practical education, rather than your theory education,
NOTE CONF
let me mention a few of the things that you
will see in most actual implementations of regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
So these are things that pretty much every implementation has
in fact.
NOTE CONF
Um, though is pretty much a standard implementation of regular
expressions.
NOTE CONF
Well, there are two standards because you can never have
enough standards, right?
NOTE CONF
So anybody heard of Posix?
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So Posix is an international standard for Unix like operating
NOTE CONF
systems and most operating systems.
So it's the operating system and the whole programming environment.
NOTE CONF
And it was designed for Unix.
But these days almost everything else has a Posix compatible
NOTE CONF
mode, even windows.
And one of the things that Posix does, Posix does
NOTE CONF
is define regular expressions in what was the traditional Unix
way.
NOTE CONF
Um.
However, I mentioned my favourite programming language, Perl, many times,
NOTE CONF
and one of the really striking features of Perl is
that it has regular expressions on steroids.
NOTE CONF
Not so much on steroids as on every illegal drug
you can think of, and then some that you haven't
NOTE CONF
thought of because they're very, very useful.
And actually, Perl's regular expressions are not regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
They're much more powerful.
And that's something I have a talk about, which I
NOTE CONF
probably won't have time to do next week, but you
never know.
NOTE CONF
Um, and people like them so much that almost all
regular expression libraries, including the ones used in your browsers
NOTE CONF
and so on, now have a mode where they support
P-series Perl compatible regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
These are not PCR.
These are quite old fashioned ones.
NOTE CONF
Well, these are also pieces.
So one of the very common ones is something we
NOTE CONF
want to do a lot is to say I want
to look at words starting with a vowel, starting with
NOTE CONF
a consonant, or starting with some other bunch of characters.
And it would be a real pain to write down
NOTE CONF
A or B, or C.
Well, I can just write down a, b, c in
NOTE CONF
square brackets.
So the square bracket notation is used a lot.
NOTE CONF
It's a real pain to write down a, b, c,
d, e, f when you can just write down a
NOTE CONF
to F, so that we use a lot in programming
language syntax analysis.
NOTE CONF
This is an example of a simple regular expression, which
we want to complement a lot because we often want
NOTE CONF
to talk about.
I want my piece of syntax to contain any character
NOTE CONF
except something.
Um, how many of you have been annoyed by inventing
NOTE CONF
a password for some site and it telling you it
is not a valid password without explaining why it's not
NOTE CONF
valid?
Now, if only they would tell you the regular expression
NOTE CONF
you had to match.
You could do it because there is a regular expression
NOTE CONF
in there somewhere, which is it is matching against.
So negated character classes are very common.
NOTE CONF
Optionality is useful.
So we often want to say I want a word
NOTE CONF
optionally followed by some other word.
We can write that as the empty string or the
NOTE CONF
word itself, but we do it so often that we
have a question mark saying optional regular expression, optional expression.
NOTE CONF
Um, we also quite often want to say I want
at least one of something that happens all the time.
NOTE CONF
So that's exactly the same as writing down R followed
by R star, because this is one followed by at
NOTE CONF
least zero of them.
But we do it so often that almost every expression
NOTE CONF
library lets you just write our plus.
And something that is used a great deal is the
NOTE CONF
single wildcard character.
In most libraries it's a dot.
NOTE CONF
So full stop doesn't mean full stop.
Full stop means any character.
NOTE CONF
It gets a little bit more complicated because in programming
languages and text processing.
NOTE CONF
We often work on a line by line basis, and
quite often we don't actually want to match new lines.
NOTE CONF
When we write a dot.
So in most libraries, the wildcard means pretty much means
NOTE CONF
any character except an end of line.
Um, there are lots and lots more of these.
NOTE CONF
That's supposed to be wild card.
There isn't yet a green vegetable in regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
Um, but the nice thing about regular expressions is that
with this set, you can write quickly and concisely regular
NOTE CONF
expressions for most things that you're going to meet in
practice.
NOTE CONF
So all of these things are syntactic sugar.
They don't add any power.
NOTE CONF
But as I said, modern languages often give you a
great deal extra.
NOTE CONF
And then there's something I did up there, which I
will explain finally.
NOTE CONF
In real life, when we match against a regular expression,
we're not usually interested in whether the string matches the
NOTE CONF
regular expression we want to know does some bit of
the string, because we're searching for something in a bigger
NOTE CONF
string.
And usually we also want to know what was it
NOTE CONF
that matched the regular expression we were looking for?
So there are a couple of things you can do
NOTE CONF
to achieve these aims.
One thing is that in the most implementations, if you
NOTE CONF
write down a regular expression, then the system automatically assumes
that you meant plus anything before and anything after.
NOTE CONF
And the way to avoid that happening is usually to
use the carrot and the dollar.
NOTE CONF
Carrot means beginning of line and dollar means end of
line.
NOTE CONF
And if you want to know which substring you want
to know, you're looking for a particular regular expression in
NOTE CONF
a big piece of text, you want to know which
string matched it, and if you have a complex regular
NOTE CONF
expression, you might not want to know which bits of
your target string match the bits, so you can then
NOTE CONF
do stuff to them.
So typically we do that by writing brackets around stuff
NOTE CONF
and then allowing your replacement text to talk about, for
example backslash one or dollar one or something to mean
NOTE CONF
whatever bit was matched by the first bracket and whatever
bit was matched by the second bracket.
NOTE CONF
So these again are things that you can learn to
use, and they will save you time in replacing errors
NOTE CONF
in your code.
Um, it all gets more complicated.
NOTE CONF
I'm just about to run out of time.
So the last thing I will mention is one of
NOTE CONF
the problems is that we've talked about regexp as a
description of non-deterministic automata.
NOTE CONF
But non-deterministic automata are not real, right?
They don't have a physical meaning.
NOTE CONF
So programming language is determinism.
If I give you a string like a star, a
NOTE CONF
star, according to the way we've defined things that should
match any string of A's followed by any string of
NOTE CONF
A's, and it can match it in any way you
like.
NOTE CONF
The first bit could match zero, and the second bit
could match all the A's.
NOTE CONF
The other way round they could split in the middle
as they choose.
NOTE CONF
And all of those are good matches.
It's very hard to do text processing if you've got
NOTE CONF
a huge range of possible matches and you don't know
which one.
NOTE CONF
So programming languages turn all these non-deterministic things into deterministic
things.
NOTE CONF
And the way they do that is to say that
this star operator, which is swallowing up input, is what
NOTE CONF
is called greedy.
So when you see a star, the regular expression matcher
NOTE CONF
says, I will take as many A's as I possibly
can, and then I will go on and try to
NOTE CONF
match the rest.
Now that can get complicated, because you might swallow up
NOTE CONF
a lot of A's, go on and try to match
the rest and find that you can't.
NOTE CONF
But maybe if you had eaten so many of the
initial A's, you would be able to match the second
NOTE CONF
half.
So they do backtracking.
NOTE CONF
They swallow up as much as possible and then look
for the rest of it.
NOTE CONF
And if that doesn't work, they backtrack one step and
say, I ate too much.
NOTE CONF
This is going to get a bit unpleasant, isn't it?
If I carry this metaphor forward, um, so they backtrack.
NOTE CONF
If that doesn't work, they backtrack Backtracked further, and that's
an expensive operation.
NOTE CONF
So in the old days, when computers were slow, it
was possible to write apps that could take noticeable time
NOTE CONF
to work on some texts.
Then you could rewrite them to work much better.
NOTE CONF
And there's a whole lot of stuff you can do
to play around with Perl's regex and much more complicated
NOTE CONF
stuff.
But to be honest, Perl is a write only language.
NOTE CONF
You can write programs in Perl, but reading them is
a problem and therefore people don't use the fancy stuff.
NOTE CONF
Um, when I give the talk about this, I show
you some of the fancy stuff and I have searched
NOTE CONF
through every piece of code I have in my directory,
which is some 40 years worth of writing code, and
NOTE CONF
I don't see any instances of any of the complicated
things.
NOTE CONF
They're just too hard to think about, but they aren't
half fun.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's the end of the core part of
the course.
NOTE CONF
As I said, I'll stick on the website the plan
for next week's lectures and see you there or not
NOTE CONF
as you choose.